OperatingSystems(0368216208)
MessageSlotKernelModuleAssignment
Duedate(viamoodle):December28th,23:59
Individualworkpolicy
Theworkyousubmitinthiscourseisrequiredtobetheresultofyourindividualeffort
only.Youmaydiscussconceptsandideaswithothers,butyoumustprogramindividually.
Youshouldneverobserveanotherstudent’scode, fromthisorprevioussemesters.
Studentsviolatingthispolicywill receiveacoursegradeof 250(“didnot completecourse
requirements”).
AIUsagePolicy
AI tools(ChatGPT,Claude,Copilot, etc.)maybeusedfor learningconceptsand
understandingsystemcalls,butthecoursematerial isyourprimaryresource.
Youmustunderstandandbeabletoexplaineverylineofcodeyousubmit.Submittingcodeyou
don’tunderstandviolatestheindividualworkpolicy.
Requireddocumentation:IfyouuseAItools,addacommentattheendofyourmessage_slot.c
filewithalinktoyourconversation(e.g.,//AIchat:https://...).
1 Introduction
Note:Wehighlyrecommendreviewingtheexamplesfromtherecitationsregarding
loadablekernelmodulesbeforebeginningthisassignment.
Thegoalofthisassignment istogainexperiencewithkernelprogrammingand,particularly,
abetterunderstandingonthedesignandimplementationof inter-processcommunication(IPC),
kernelmodules,anddrivers.
Inthisassignment,youwill implementakernelmodulethatprovidesanewIPCmechanism,
calledamessageslot.Amessageslotisacharacterdevicefilethroughwhichprocessescommunicate.
Amessageslotdevicehasmultiplemessagechannelsactiveconcurrently,whichcanbeusedby
multipleprocesses.Afteropeningamessageslotdevicefile,aprocessusesioctl()tospecifythe
idof themessagechannel itwantstouse. Itsubsequentlyusesread()/write()toreceive/send
messagesonthechannel. Incontrasttopipes,amessagechannelpreservesamessageuntil it
isoverwritten,sothesamemessagecanbereadmultipletimes.
2 Messageslotspecification
Amessageslotappearsinthesystemasacharacterdevicefile.Thisdevicefileismanagedbythe
messageslotdevicedriver,whichyouwill implement.Amessageslot isapseudodevice: itdoesn’t
1
correspond to a physical hardware device, and therefore all its functionality is provided by the
device driver.
Message slot device files. A device file has a major number and a minor number. The major
number tells the kernel which driver is associated with the device file. The minor number is used
internally by the driver for its own purposes.
In our case: There can be several message slot files, which correspond to different message slots.
All of these files are managed by your driver, i.e., they all have the same major number, which
is hard-coded to 235. However, different message slot files will have different minor numbers,
allowing your driver to distinguish between them.
Device files are created with the mknod command, which takes as arguments the file’s major and
minor numbers. For example:
mknod /dev/slot0 c 235 0
The above command creates a character device file /dev/slot0 with major number 235 (i.e., a
message slot) and minor number 0. Then, a subsequent command creates another message slot file:
mknod /dev/slot1 c 235 1
2.1 Semantics of message slot file operations
The message slot driver has special semantics for the ioctl, write, and read file operations, as
described below. Note that the description is given in the style of a manual page, and specifies the
behavior from the perspective of the processes using the driver. One of your tasks is to figure out
how to implement the module so that it provides the specified behavior.
2.1.1 ioctl()
A message slot supports two ioctl commands:
1. MSG_SLOT_CHANNEL: Takes a single unsigned int parameter that specifies a non-zero channel
id. Invoking this ioctl() sets the file descriptor’s channel id. Subsequent reads/writes on this
f
ile descriptor will receive/send messages on the specified channel.
2. MSG_SLOT_SET_CEN: Takes a single unsigned int parameter that specifies the censorship mode
(0 for disabled, 1 for enabled). When censorship is enabled, messages written to the channel will
be censored using a simple algorithm: every 4th character in the message is replaced with ’#’.
The censorship state is maintained per file descriptor.
Note: The default state is uncensored (mode 0). You can write to the channel immediately after
setting the channel ID; invoking MSG_SLOT_SET_CEN is only required if you wish to change this
default behavior.
Error cases:
• If the passed command is not MSG_SLOT_CHANNEL or MSG_SLOT_SET_CEN, the ioctl() returns-1
and errno is set to EINVAL.
• If the passed channel id is 0 (for MSG_SLOT_CHANNEL), the ioctl() returns-1 and errno is set
to EINVAL.
2
2.1.2 write()
Writes a non-empty message of up to 128 bytes from the user’s buffer to the channel. Returns the
number of bytes written, unless an error occurs. (Note that the message can contain any sequence
of bytes, it is not necessarily a C string.)
Error cases:
• If no channel has been set on the file descriptor, returns-1 and errno is set to EINVAL.
• If the passed message length is 0 or more than 128, returns-1 and errno is set to EMSGSIZE.
• In any other error case (for example, failing to allocate memory), returns-1 and errno is set
appropriately (you are free to choose the exact value).
Censorship: When censorship is enabled for the file descriptor (set via MSG_SLOT_SET_CEN), the
message is censored before being stored in the channel. The censorship algorithm replaces every 4th
character (e.g., positions 3, 7, 11, etc., using 0-based indexing) with ’#’. The censored message is
what gets stored and will be returned by subsequent reads.
2.1.3 read()
Reads the last message written on the channel into the user’s buffer. Returns the number of bytes
read, unless an error occurs:
Error cases:
• If no channel has been set on the file descriptor, returns-1 and errno is set to EINVAL.
• If no message exists on the channel, returns-1 and errno is set to EWOULDBLOCK.
• If the provided buffer length is too small to hold the last message written on the channel, returns-1 and errno is set to ENOSPC.
• In any other error case (for example, failing to allocate memory), returns-1 and errno is set
appropriately (you are free to choose the exact value).
Censorship: Reading from a channel always returns the stored message exactly as it was written.
If a message was written with censorship enabled, read() will return the censored version (with ’#’
characters). If a message was written without censorship, read() will return the original message.
IMPORTANT: Message slot reads/write should be atomic: they should always read/write the
entire passed message and not parts of it. So a successful write() always returns the number of
bytes in the supplied message and a successful read() returns the number of bytes in the last
message written on the channel.
3 Assignment description
Implement the following:
1. message_slot: A kernel module implementing the message slot IPC mechanism.
2. message_sender: A user space program to send a message.
3. message_reader: A user space program to read a message.
3
3.1 Message slot kernel module (device driver)
Implement the module in files named message_slot.c and message_slot.h:
1. The module should use the hard-coded major number 235. (The proper way to implement a
character device driver is to dynamically allocate a major number, as seen in the recitation, but
we will use a hard-coded major number for simplicity.)
2. If module initialization fails, print an error message using printk(KERN_ERR ...).
3. The module should implement the file operations needed to provide the message slot interface:
device_open, device_ioctl, device_read, and device_write. Implement these operations
any way you like, as long as the module provides the message slot interface specified above. You
might find these suggestions useful:
• You’ll need a data structure to describe individual message slots (device files with different
minor numbers). In device_open(), the module can check if it has already created a data
structure for the file being opened, and create one if not. You can get the opened file’s minor
number using the iminor() kernel function (applied to the struct inode* argument of
device_open()).
• device_ioctl() needs to associate the passed channel id with the file descriptor it was
invoked on. You can use the void* private_data field in the file structure parameter
for this purpose. For example: file->private_data = (void*) 3. Check <linux/fs.h>
for the details on struct file.
4. Bounds on number of messages channels and message slots:
• For each message slot file, assume that no more than 220 message channels will be used.
This does not mean that the channel ids will be smaller than 220, just that you need to
support at most 220 different ids.
• If you use register_chrdev() to register your device, you can assume that minor numbers
are in the range [0,255] (i.e., there can be at most 256 different message slots device files).
(This occurs because register_chrdev() limits the registered device to 256 minor number.)
Otherwise, you can assume that minor numbers do not exceed 220, because Linux uses 20
bits to represent minor numbers.
5. In the module’s struct file_operations, include the initialization
.owner = THIS_MODULE,
This will prevent the module from being unloaded while it is being used.
6. You need to define both MSG_SLOT_CHANNEL and MSG_SLOT_SET_CEN ioctl commands using the
appropriate macros (e.g., _IOW).
7. Thecensorship state should be maintained per file descriptor (you can store it in file->private_data
along with the channel id).
8. Censorship only affects write operations. Read operations always return the stored message as-is,
regardless of the current censorship setting of the file descriptor.
9. You are responsible for defining the driver’s ioctl command, as shown in the recitation.
10. Allocate memory using kmalloc() with GFP_KERNEL flag. (It is declared in <linux/slab.h>.)
4
11. While your module runs, the total amount of memory allocated by it should be O(C ·M +N),
where C is the total number of channels that were used (across all device files), M is the size
of the largest message held and N is the number of times MSG_SLOT_SET_CEN ioctl command is
called.
12. When unloaded, the module should free all memory that it allocated.
13. Remember that processes aren’t trusted. Verify arguments to file operations and return-1 with
errno set to EINVAL if the arguments are invalid. In particular, check the validity of user space
buffers.
14. You can assume that any invocation of the module’s operations (including loading/unloading)
will run alone; i.e., there will not be concurrent system call invocations. This does not mean
that there can’t be several processes that have the same message slot open or using the same
channel; it just means that they won’t access the device concurrently.
3.2 Message sender
Implement the program in a file named message_sender.c.
Command line arguments:
• argv[1]: message slot file path.
• argv[2]: the target message channel id. Assume a non-negative integer.
• argv[3]: censorship mode (0 for disabled, 1 for enabled).
• argv[4]: the message to pass.
You should validate that the correct number of command line arguments is passed.
The flow:
1. Open the specified message slot device file.
2. Set the censorship mode to the value specified on the command line (0 to disable censorship, 1
to enable censorship).
3. Set the channel id to the id specified on the command line.
4. Write the specified message to the message slot file. Don’t include the terminating null character
of the C string as part of the message.
5. Close the device.
6. Exit the program with exit value 0.
If an error occurs in any of the above steps, print an appropriate error message (using strerror()
or perror()) and exit the program with exit value 1.
3.3 Message reader
Implement the program in a file named message_reader.c.
5
Command line arguments:
• argv[1]: message slot file path.
• argv[2]: the target message channel id. Assume a non-negative integer.
You should validate that the correct number of command line arguments is passed.
The flow:
1. Open the specified message slot device file.
2. Set the channel id to the id specified on the command line.
3. Read a message from the message slot file to a buffer.
4. Close the device.
5. Print the message to standard output (using the write() system call). Print only the message,
without any additional text.
6. Exit the program with exit value 0.
If an error occurs in any of the above steps, print an appropriate error message (using strerror()
or perror()) and exit the program with exit value 1.
3.4 Example session
1. As root (e.g., with sudo): Load (insmod) the message_slot.ko module.
2. As root: Create a message slot file using mknod.
3. As root: Change the message slot file’s permissions to make it readable and writable by your user.
4. Invoke message_sender to send a message on some channel without censorship.
5. Invoke message_reader to read the message on the same channel.
6. Invoke message_sender to send a message on some channel with censorship.
7. Invoke message_reader to read the message on the same channel.
8. Execute steps #4 to #7 several times, for different channels, in different sequences.
4 General guidelines
1. Because your message sender takes the messages from the command line, it will only be able to
send a C string as a message. This does not mean that the kernel module or message reader
should only work with C string messages. The kernel module provides the general interface
specified in Section 2, and any program—not necessarily yours—can use it.
2. There’s no requirement for the message sender/reader to exit “cleanly” on error. These programs
may terminate without freeing memory and closing file descriptors.
6
5 Submission instructions
1. Submit a ZIP file containing five files: message_slot.c, message_slot.h, message_sender.c,
message_reader.c, and a Makefile that builds the module. The ZIP file should be named
ex4_XXXXXXXXX.zip, where XXXXXXXXX is your ID #.
2. The message sender and reader programs must compile cleanly on the course VM (no errors
or warnings) when the following command is run in a directory containing the source code file
and the message_slot.h file:
gcc-O3-Wall-std=c11 message_sender.c (or message_reader.c)
Appendix: Troubleshooting for ARM Users
If you encounter the following error during compilation on an ARM architecture (e.g., Apple Silicon
M1/M2/M3 via VM):
make[1]: * /lib/modules/5.10.0-18-arm64/build: No such file or directory. Stop.
make: * [Makefile:7: all] Error 2
This error indicates that the kernel headers for your specific kernel version are missing. To
resolve this, please execute the following commands in order:
1. Update and upgrade your system repositories:
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
sudo apt-get dist-upgrade
2. Reboot the system: This step is crucial to ensure that any kernel updates are applied
correctly before installing headers.
reboot
3. Install the Linux headers: This command installs the headers specifically matching your
currently running kernel.
sudo apt-get install linux-headers-$(uname-r)
For additional information, you may refer to this discussion: https://stackoverflow.com/
questions/22165929/install-linux-headers-on-debian-unable-to-locate-package
7
